In session one, we compared decision
making processes in business settings with
and without significant uncertainty.
We have used the wireless data
plan problem as an example
illustrating a high
uncertainty business setting.
We have learned about reward and
risk measures, and in this session,
we will look at how we can
estimate the values of reward and
risk for any course of action we
choose using a simulation toolkit.
Let's begin.
Okay, in section two, we're going
to build an algebraic model for
evaluating a wireless data plan,
and then use the simulation toolkit
to obtain estimates of the reward and the
risk measures associated with this plan.
Here's a reminder of the business
context we're looking at.
The current wireless data plan that
our consultant has charges $10 per
gigabyte of data.
The new data plan charges a fixed fee for
all data usage up to 20 gigabytes,
and then it also charges $15
per gigabyte of data above 20.
For example, if the data usage in
a particular month is 22 gigabytes,
she'll have to pay $160 for the first
20 gigabytes and $30 for the next two.
So her total payment in
such month will be $190.
If, on the other hand,
her data usage in a particular month
does not exceed 20 gigabytes,
her monthly payment will be just $160.
Based on historical data usage values,
our consultant estimates
that her family's monthly data usage is
normally distributed with mean 23 and
a standard deviation of 5 gigabytes.
So she also knows the distribution of her
monthly payments under the current plan,
normal with mean $230 and
a standard deviation of $50.
What about the distribution of
monthly payments under the new plan?
If we want to estimate the reward and
the risk measures for
this new plan, in other words,
the expected monthly payment and
the standard deviation of
monthly payments, what are they?
Let us use the verbal description of
the new plan to connect the random input,
data usage U to the random output,
whose probability distribution we're
interested in, monthly payment P.
If U is below or at 20,
then the monthly payment P is 160.
If U is above 20, then the monthly
payment is 160 + 15 x (U- 20).
In other words, extra payment of $15 for
every gigabyte above 20.
Now we can combine both cases
using one EXCEL formula, IF.
The IF formula has the following form,
IF(Condition, Choice1, Choice2).
This function evaluates condition and
IF happens to be true,
then U becomes equal to Choice1.
And if the condition happens to be false,
then IF becomes equal to Choice2.
So in this case, if U is greater than 20,
then IF selects Choice1,
which is 15 x (U- 20).
Otherwise, it selects Choice2,
no extra payment.
We have a formula that expresses
the monthly payment P as a function of
monthly data usage U.
So let's return to our main question.
If U is distributed as a normal random
variable with mean 23 gigabytes and
standard deviation of 5 gigabytes,
what is the probability distribution of P?
What reward value does our consultant
get if she subscribes to the new plan?
What risk will she be facing?
As far as the reward is concerned, the
expected payment value, can we just plug
in the expected value of U 23 into our
formula, and get the expected value of P?
It's very tempting to try and
get the estimate of the expected value
of a random key performance indicator
by replacing all the random factors
it depends on by the expected values.
For example, if we plug in 23 gigabytes
into that formula, we get a value of $205.
Is this the expected value
of our monthly payment P?
Unfortunately, while there are cases when
you can get the correct estimate for
the expected value of a key
performance indicator in this way,
in many other cases,
this is the wrong way to go.
If you have a contract where payment,
P, is a linear function of U,
in other words,
P is equal to U times constant plus or
minus another constant,
then this approach will work.
For example, in the old data plan,
our consultant pays $10 for each gigabyte.
So under that plan, the monthly payment
P is equal to 10 times the data usage U.
10 times U is a linear function of U, and
the expected value of P in this case is
just 10 times the expected value of U,
or 10 times 23, which is 230.
But here's a simple example showing
us how it all can go wrong.
Let's say our data usage
U can only take 2 values,
each with 50% probability,
18 gigabytes and 28 gigabytes.
The expected value of U under this
probability distribution is still 23
gigabytes, and the standard
deviation is still 5 gigabytes.
Let's see what kind of
distribution we will get for
the monthly payment amount, P.
If U is 18, then P is equal to 160.
If U is 28, then P is 280.
The expected value of P, is 0.5
x 160 + 0.5 x 280, $220.
Now this is very different from
$205 we obtained earlier by
replacing the random variable,
U, by its expectation.
Please keep this observation in mind.
In general, we cannot simply replace
random variables in our formulas and
hope to get the right estimates
of the key performance measures.
So we're back to asking the same question.
What are the reward and
risk measures that describe our new plan?
How do we estimate them?
The answer is use simulation.
Simulation is a tool for converting
probability distributions of random
factors we cannot perfectly control,
like data usage, into probability
distributions for outcomes we're
interested in, like monthly payment.
In simulation, we'll call random factors
like data usage random inputs, and
outcomes with distribution would
like to obtain random outputs.
Here's how simulation works.
In each simulation step,
we generate a random instance of
the input quantity like data usage U.
In other words, we know the distribution
of this random input, in our case,
it is normal with mean 23 and
standard deviation of 5 gigabytes.
And we will instruct Excel or
any other simulation tool we use
to pull one value from that distribution.
Then, we use the formula that connects
our random input U, in our case, and
the random output P, in our case,
to calculate the value of the output
random variable corresponding to that
instance of the random input
variable we just generated.
In other words, we ask a simulation tool
to generate an instance of a random data
usage value U, and then calculate the
corresponding monthly payment value, P.
We can repeat the simulation step,
which we will call a simulation
run As many times as we like.
Since at every simulation run, we convert
a random input value, such as data usage U
into the corresponding output value, such
as payment P, the simulation basically
converts the set of random input numbers
into a set of random output numbers.
We will use the term input sample and
output sample to describe the sets of
numbers generated during the simulation.
Once we generate a sample
of output values, for
example, is sample of payment values.
Or can use the sample to estimate
the expected value of the output,
standard deviation etc.
In other words, we can estimate reward and
risk measures that we will use later
to choose the best course of action.
We will use Excel for running simulations
and for analysing their results.
Specifically, we will use an Excel
add-in called Analysis Tool Pak to run
simulations.
This add-in is a part of standard
Excel installation on Windows.
If you're using Mac,
here's a link to a free software that has
similar capabilities as Analysis Tool Pak.
If you're using Google Sheets,
an add-on called XLMiner Will
have similar functionality.
Okay.
We're ready to use Excel to set up and
run a simulation for the monthly payment
values under the new wireless data plan.
We have created an Excel template,
dataplan_0,
you can use to follow our setup.
In this first example, we'll set up and
run a simulation with just
ten simulation runs to help us
understand how simulation works.
Okay let's go to dataplan_0.
We start with a template dataplan_0
that contains all the data we
need to set up a simulation.
In our analysis,
we'll use Excel 2013 on Windows.
We'll be setting up our simulation
using Analysis Tool Pack,
which is a standard add-in in Excel.
It is usually located under data
tab in the portion called analysis,
right next to the solver button.
If you do not see data analysis there,
you should go to file, options,
add-ins.
And here what says,
manage Excel add-ins, you click go, and
you wanna make sure that
the Analysis Tool Pak is checked.
While setting up our simulation, keep in
mind that the ultimate purpose of running
a simulation is to obtain estimates for
the measures of reward and
risk associated with a new data plan.
As we discussed earlier,
we will use the expected monthly payment
under the new plan as a measure of reward,
and the standard deviation of monthly
payment as a measure of risk.
Okay, in order to prepare our simulation
let's first add headers to cells C1,
D1, and E1.
In C1, let's enter simulation run.
This header will indicate
that in column C,
we will count the instances
of our random variables.
In D1, let's put data usage,
U in gigabytes.
In column D, we will be generating random
instances of the monthly data usage.
Finally, in E1,
let's put payment, P in dollars.
Column E will contain the monthly
payment amounts calculated
using the random instances of
the monthly data usage from column D.
In this example, we will generate
ten random instances of monthly data
usages U and calculate ten corresponding
values of monthly payment P.
Every time we generate a random
instance of data usage,
we will count it as a simulation run.
So let's number the simulation
runs will conduct 1 through 10,
and place the simulation run identifiers
in column C, in cells C2 through C11.
Okay, the actual random instances
of monthly data usage for
each simulation run will be store
in the cells D2 through D11.
In particular, the cell D2 will contain
the first random instance of monthly data
usage, the cell D3 the second random
instance of monthly data usage, and so on.
But how do we generate
those random instances?
Well, Analysis Tool Pad provides us with
the tool to generate random numbers.
And that's the tool we're going to use.
Let's go to data, click on data analysis,
select random number generation,
and click okay.
In the random number generation dialogue,
let's put in one,
into the number variables box.
This tells Excel that we're going to
generate the instances of a single,
random variable monthly
data usage in our case.
Next, we'll put ten.
Into number of random numbers box.
This will instruct Excel to generate ten
random instances of monthly data usage.
Next, in the distribution pull down menu,
we choose
normal and specify 23 and five
as mean and standard deviation
of the normal random variable.
Now, we have instructed Excel to
generate ten random instances of monthly
data usage using a normal distribution
with the parameters we specified.
As you can see from this drop down menu,
Excel can generate random variables
using a number of different probability
distributions, in addition to the normal.
Now, let's put some combination
of numbers say, one,
two, three into the random seed box.
Random seed instructs itself to generate
random numbers from the distribution with
specified in a particular way.
We do not need to worry to much about
the seed value in order to run and
interpret the simulation.
Just keep in mind that if you
are running Excel 2013 and Windows, and
you set up your model in
the same way as I do, and
use the same number of simulation runs and
the same seed, you will generate exactly
the same sequence of monthly
usage values that I do.
So, if you want to compare your
simulation results to mine,
you should be setting up your simulation
model in the same way as I do.
Use the same number of simulation runs,
like ten that I use in this case, and
the same seed, like 1, 2,
3 that I use in this case.
In practice, it does not matter much
what seed you select as long as you run
a fairly long simulation.
In otherwords, as long as the value in
the number of random numbers box is high.
We'll talk more about short
versus long simulations and
about different seed
values later this week.
Okay.
One last thing, in the output options,
let's select output range
starting in the cell D2.
This way Excel will put the first random
monthly usage number it generates into
the cell D2.
The second random monthly usage
number into the cell D3 and so on.
Now, when you click OK,
Excel will generate 10 random
monthly data usage numbers
in cells D2 from D11,
using the distribution and
the parameters we specified.
The numbers in the cells D2
through D11 are all instances of
a normal random variable with mean 23 and
standard deviation 5.
In other words Excel generated, or
using another word, simulated for us,
ten instances of what the future might
hold in terms of monthly data usage.
Let's make sure that the values
in the cells D2 through
D11 are visually distinguishable
from the other values.
Let's change the font in
the cells into green and bold.
We'll use this same visual designation for
the random inputs into
our simulation models.
Now, what about the simulation outputs?
The quantity we're interested in
is the monthly payment amount, P.
Let's go into the cells E2 through E11 and
put in formulas that will
calculate the monthly payment value P,
for any monthly Data Usage, U.
Let's start with the cell E2.
The way the new data plan works is by
charging $160 up front, and then by
adding $15 for each gigabyte above 20.
Let's put this formula into
the cell E2 using the value in
the cell D2 as the first possible
instance of the monthly data usage.
We have already discussed
an algebraic formula that calculates
the monthly payment for
any value of monthly data usage.
The algebraic formula we
put in the cell E2 is $160,
that's B5, plus if the data usage, D2,
exceeds 20, B4,
then we're charged extra $15 for
each gigabyte of usage above 20.
Otherwise, there are no extra charges.
The result in this instance is $160
since the monthly usage in
this instance fell below 20.
If we want to calculate the values
of monthly payment corresponding
to the remaining nine random instances
of data usage We need to copy and
paste the formula in E2 into
the cells E3 through E11.
But before we do this we must
use absolute cell references for
the cells B4, B5, and B6 for
the formula in the cell E2.
Those are the parameters
of our data plan and
they do not change when we copy and
paste the payment formula.
So we go to the cell E2, And
use the shortcut F4 to put the dollar
signs around B4, B5, and B6.
Let's start with B5, And
then move to B4, and
then B6 and then B4 again.
Okay.
After that, we can copy and
paste the payment formula into
the cells E3 through E11.
So we now have 10 random
monthly payment values that
correspond to 10 random monthly
data usage that Excel generated.
In other words,
Excel generated a random sample of the
future data usage values and we have used
the payment formula to convert the sample
into a sample of future payment values.
This random sample of payment values
is the output of our simulation.
We will use blue color and bold font to
make sure that those values look different
from the random input values, and
from other values on the spreadsheet.
To facilitate the future analysis
of the results of our simulation,
let us calculate the average and
the standard deviation of the simulated
samples of the monthly data usage, and
the corresponding monthly payment values.
The average of a sample of random
numbers is also called sample mean.
And the standard deviation of
a sample of random numbers
is also called a sample
standard deviation.
Let's put out these headers
into the cells C13 and C14.
Sample mean, and
sample standard deviation.
Let's look first at the sample
of monthly data usage,
where we'll calculate the average of
these ten numbers in the cell D13.
So we put in the formula,
average of D2 through D11.
As we can see,
the sample mean in this case is about 25.
25 gigabytes.
And in the cell D14,
we will calculate the value of
the standard deviation of the same sample.
The formula we put in the cell D14 is,
STDEV of the same cells, (D2:D11).
There's several formulas for calculating
the standard deviation in Excel, and
those formulas are applicable
in different settings.
The STDEV formula is used for
a sample of random numbers.
The sample standard deviation for this
particular sample is around 7.8 gigabytes.
Let's use the font for the cells D13 and
D14, as we did for the cells D2 and D11.
So it's a green font and bold.
Now we're ready to compute
the estimates of the reward and
risk measures associated
with the new data plan.
As we discussed earlier, we will use
the estimate of the expected value of
the monthly payments as a reward measure,
and the estimate of the standard deviation
of the monthly payments
as the measure of risk.
In order to calculate the sample mean and
sample standard deviation for
our sample of payment values,
all we have to do now is to just copy and
paste the formulas from the cells D13 and
D14 into the cells E13 and E14.
We'll use the same font scheme for
E13 and E14 as we did for
E2 through E11, so it's blue and bold.
So, The estimate for
the measure of reward associated with
the new data plan is about $253 and
the estimate for
the measure of risk is about $92.
For completeness, here's the picture of
the Excel file data plan 10 we created
with all the formulas that helped us
to set up and run the simulation.
In the next session, we'll have a more
detail look at the simulation results.
In this session, we have learned to use
simulation to estimate the reward and
risk measure associated with any
potential decision we can make.
Next time, we'll look at the
interpretation of the simulation results.
In particular, we will compare the results
of short and long simulations,
to see how precise our
simulation estimates are.
We will also look at histograms as
a convenient way of presenting the results
of the simulation.
See you next time.